Emir.
We have breached your barbican
and taken your city.
Your castle is surrounded.
I have come to ask for your surrender,
to save your people
unnecessary suffering and death.
A translator
is not necessary.
I understand you perfectly.
There will be no surrender.
As we speak,
a great Saracen army is on its way
from Cairo and Alexandria to join us.
When it arrives it will be you
who is surrounded and destroyed.
For your sake,
you should hope it arrives soon.
We are not worried.
We have food and supplies
to last us many months.
But no water.
Syracuse has six wells.
I diverted water from five.
Your supply will last a week at most.
Perhaps your allies will reach you
and destroy us before that happens,
or perhaps they won't and…
Syracuse will perish.
But either way…
many will die.
And all will suffer.
Then I offer another solution.
Single combat between two fighters.
If you are victorious, Syracuse is yours
and you have my promise
that my warriors will not retaliate.
If you lose,
you must depart and not return.
Either way, my people must not be harmed.
And who would your warrior be?
Me.
And yours?
I fight for the Empire.
No.
You will fight my Varangian.
And you have my promise.
Your people will not be harmed
and our agreement, honored.
Yes, higher. Yeah, good.
Attack.
Yes.
Good.
Block it, like this.
What's that?
Mother, watch me!
Try again. You're getting better.
I feel dizzy.
How much mead did you drink yesterday?
I saw you.
You are too young to drink so much.
Go rest a while.
And how do you feel this morning?
I feel wonderful.
It was a night to remember.
That I don't remember.
Hrefna, what are you doing up?
You should be under furs
with that new husband of yours.
Kolr's not feeling well.
- I came to get water.
- He just needs to sleep off the mead.
Here, Hrefna.
Help! Help!
Help!
What is it?
- How long has he been like this?
- What happened?
I don't know.
He's burning up. His heart is racing.
What did he eat?
Same as we all had
at the feast last night.
Harald.
- Show me the kitchen.
- Yes.
This is where we cook.
Where do you get supplies?
We grow or catch everything we eat
except flour.
We must trade for that.
What kind of flour?
Rye.
We traded for it in Kattegat.
What is it? Why are the gods angry at us?
The gods had nothing to do with this.
Fungi. It's very poisonous.
Someone put them in the flour.
What will happen to us?
There is a remedy.
It may grow nearby,
but there isn't much time.
Show these to Freydis.
Tell her I will be back.
He's shaking and can't keep it down.
It happened so fast.
Freydis, you need to see this.
- Now?
- Yes.
Okay, I am… I'll be back.
Is this your first visit to Kattegat,
Lord Magnus?
No, I was here as a boy.
King Svein of Norway, son of Canute.
My name is Magnus Olafsson.
Magnus,
son of Olaf.
It was with your father
that I first bloodied my sword.
What brings you to Kattegat
after all these years?
My father.
I've come to Kattegat to seek permission
to erect a shrine here in his name.
I trust that is all
you intend to do while in Kattegat.
Queen Aelfgifu.
Forgive me. I did not see you there.
You've grown up much
since I saw you last, Magnus.
- Yet you have not changed a day.
- Hmm.
Norway agrees with you.
When it hasn't tried to kill me.
What has truly brought you
to Kattegat, Magnus Olafsson?
Anything to do with taking the throne
from my son?
Dear Queen, look at my army.
No, a miracle has occurred
in England in my father's name.
A miracle?
Jarl Olaf appeared to a blind monk
in a dream, my lord.
When he awoke the next day,
his sight had been restored.
The Holy Father in Rome has proclaimed
that if a second miracle occurs,
Jarl Olaf is to be sainted.
The first Viking saint.
Saint Olaf.
Well, that would be a miracle.
If we were in Novgorod,
I could sell a thousand seats
and make enough to retire.
Good luck, Harald.
We can select three weapons.
I'll start with the battle axe.
You're quiet, which means
you're worried about something.
I worry you underestimate him.
I underestimate no man
who's trying to kill me.
We'll both be fighting for our lives.
No, only you will be.
He is fighting for his people.
As am I.
What people?
Yours? Or Romanos's?
I fight for the same reason
I've been fighting
for the last seven years.
For treasure.
So I can return to Norway
and assume the throne of my people,
which is rightfully mine.
Nothing else.
Then I am glad to hear it.
Because one of you will die today.
And that death should mean something.
Get Stígr.
There are so many.
Stígr!
Gunn!
- Did you find Stígr?
- He ran.
We found these.
- They were put in the flour.
- Stígr poisoned us.
Stígr? Why?
I don't know, but he refused to eat
the bread last night.
Destroy him!
Kill him!
So you were raised
in my father's court in London?
I am envious.
Don't be. He had little time for me.
I was raised by his huscarl guards.
Many who knew my father.
I was with Olaf in the end.
He fought bravely against Freydis.
But she was too fast.
Why did she spare you?
Because she is a woman with intelligence,
as well as feelings.
When Freydis returned Svein to me,
she asked only one thing in exchange.
Peace.
And I intend to keep that promise.
You have mistaken my motives,
Queen Aelfgifu.
I come in peace as well.
Uh, since you trade with Jomsborg,
I was hoping you could provide me
an introduction to Freydis.
So that I may fulfill
my Christian obligation to the Pope.
And what obligation is that?
- To retrieve his body.
- In Jomsborg?
The church cannot allow
the first saint of Scandinavia
to lie buried in a pagan stronghold.
Well…
that can easily be arranged.
When do you travel to Jomsborg?
Soon, Your Highness.
Very soon.
I see that you are with child.
Is it your first?
Yes.
And if it is a boy,
we will name him Canute
after his grandfather.
That's a fine name.
To Canute!
Present and future.
Enter.
Ah, boatswain.
Have you had good trading in Kattegat?
I have, Lord Magnus.
I was able to get an excellent price
for the wares you entrusted me with.
Excellent.
He has stopped shivering.
But his breathing is becoming fainter.
I'm afraid…
he is dying.
-
Your Holiness,
thank you for seeing me.
Welcome, my child.
You must speak
to the Holy Father through me, Queen Emma.
I will permit it.
But I will not.
Tis a precedent we don't wish to set.
Tell us why you're here, my child.
I fear my husband has yet to demonstrate
his value to His Holiness.
Your husband has demonstrated himself
to be a savage.
He claims to be Christian,
but he has no deference to the Church.
I beg to differ.
The Bishops of England
believe him not only a devout Christian
but a generous donor
to both the Church and all its servants.
Your husband's attacks on England
are well known
and his meeting with His Holiness
has demonstrated
his tendency for aggression.
With England, he was righting a wrong
against his people.
With violence.
Sometimes there's a need for such a remedy
where no other method
of change is available.
The Church should be grateful
to have such a powerful ally…
in times of need.
The Church
does not make allies with savages.
Yet you readily agree
to such an alliance with Earl Godwin,
for which you've received
300 solidi, Cardinal.
Earl Godwin is an emissary
of the Court of England, Your Holiness,
and as your counsel I was only seeking
to establish a line of communication.
As am I.
But I'm afraid
you don't speak for England,
Your Highness,
and your time with the Holy Father
has expired.
Amen.
Please convey my wish
that your husband continue
his most generous service.
I'm glad
to see you're recovering.
Harald, I am under no illusion
that your heart is still in the North.
That you fought for the Empire
on my behalf…
will not be forgotten.
I was honored by your trust in me.
A deserved trust.
Safe journey, Your Eminence.
Georgios Maniakes,
without your help our success in Sicily
could not have happened.
Thank you.
Ensure your men
have the full two days of pillage.
The destruction of Syracuse castle
will not rid the Empire
of the Saracen menace.
We should be doing more.
I gave the Emir my promise,
his people are to be treated with respect.
My word is law.
As you command.
Lead the way!
You may tell them we are ready.
Your Highness,
perhaps we should wait for Cardinal--
I do not wish to wait.
If it suits,
Your Holiness,
the King has asked
that we resume negotiations.
I do not claim to have
your sophistication, Your Holiness.
I speak with actions
more than I speak with words.
Deeds are what define my people.
I came to Rome to establish
a bond of friendship with you.
And I apologize if my frustrations
the other day upset you.
Thank you.
Upon reflection,
my wife has encouraged me
to offer you a personal gift.
Something to demonstrate
that an alliance with a Viking
is not something to be ashamed of,
but can be a beneficial relationship.
It is a difficult world
outside this palace, Your Holiness.
And a Viking friend
is a good friend to have.
His Holiness says
he accepts your generous offer
and wishes to thank you for your most…
thoughtful of gifts.
It is the quarters of the Viking,
Leif Eriksson.
The one who brought down
the barbican wall.
Saracen writings.
Freydis!
Stop! What are you doing?
Stop. Get off her!
You don't understand.
I'm helping.
More poison.
I saw you put it in her mouth.
If I poisoned her, why would I come back?
Wouldn't I just leave them all to die?
Look in my bag. You'll see the remedy.
Not a poison, not a mushroom.
It's a tuber taken from the woods.
It can save them. Start cutting it up.
Kolr, you must take it.
Please.
You must help me give it to him.
We must…
We must make him take it.
He is gone, Hrefna.
Let him go.
Come to see me off?
How thoughtful.
I have a gift for you to give to Freydis
so she knows that you have come in peace
and have my blessing.
I'm sure she
and her people will assist you
in recovering your father's body.
Thank you, King Svein.
I shall give them
the respect they deserve.
Just how much is that, Magnus?
Your wit is razor-sharp,
Queen Aelfgifu.
I know why my father
thought so highly of you.
Your father thought highly
of no one but himself.
I see that is a trait you have inherited.
Let us go!
Row!
Pray that he does not return.
Mother, he is on a voyage of honor.
Magnus does not know
what honor is, only opportunity.
Your grandfather made a deal with Olaf
when you became king.
In exchange for Olaf's protection,
Magnus would one day
take the Throne of Norway.
But only after I'm dead.
Exactly.
I'm not worried about Magnus, Mother.
I have an army.
All he has is a boat full of priests.
Bring a gale, a storm.
Even a sea monster.
Anything so that you never return.
Thank you.
This one is ready.
I've prepared for our journey
back to England, Your Highness.
Word has been sent ahead
to your brother, my lady,
that we will be stopping
in Normandy on route.
Thank you, Godwin.
However, you will not be joining us.
I'm sending you to Denmark
to relay our agreement here to my father.
As you wish, Your Highness.
I look forward
to seeing my wife's heritage.
I doubt that.
But you are part of my family now.
Your children have Viking blood.
It will be not hurt you
to see where that came from.
It was being a Viking
that won your victory here today, my lord.
I see I still have much to learn from it.
I agree. Safe journey.
Where are you taking this?
Here.
Stop!
Leave!
Now.
Are you the Librarian?
Yes. You speak Arabic?
I do.
I do not come to destroy, but to save.
Do you recognize this mark?
Yes. It's The Book of the Unknown.
Show it to me.
How have you heard of this book?
A katib in Egypt told me of it.
Many believe it unholy
for it questions
much of what is believed to be sacred.
Not just to Muslims,
but Christians as well.
I don't believe
in any of those faiths, only truth.
The Book of the Unknown.
Food!
Food.
What do you search for?
A map.
A place that is important to me.
They are all of unknown places.
How will you know it?
It will look different
from all of the others.
Is that the one?
I'm not sure what I'm looking at.
There is no north or south,
there's no way to orient myself.
Where is this from?
Like many in this book,
its maker is a mystery.
But it was brought here from Corfu.
We are ready.
Do it.
Release!
No, no, no, no.
No!
No! No! No!
Something's wrong.
Get me my horse! Quick!
Please.
Maniakes!
Stop him!
Hold him there.
Stop!
How could you do this? Women and children?
Our enemy.
The Emperor gave his word.
To a dead man.
To his people.
Saracens are like vermin.
If you do not destroy them,
they will multiply and spread,
and soon wipe out Christianity.
I did what the Emperor could not.
You murdered them.
No, Leif Eriksson, you did.
It was your science that was the weapon.
Your imagination that did this.
I…
was just the messenger.